EB-618: Add initial DivBase architectural decision record (ADR) Proposal (#18)
ScilifelabDataCentre/divbase: adr/001-initial-system-design.md

### Core components
- S3 Object store with access control. 
- CLI tool to interact with the DivBase service. This will provide convenient ways to run queries on the files as well as interact with the files directly (e.g. upload/download). 
- WebAPI to accept query “jobs” and provide info about the status of each job. A user can use either the CLI tool or directly send requests to the API.  
- WebAPI talks to some kind of job management system that queues, runs and reports on the status of the jobs. 
- Software for prototype the query jobs. The query logic should be able to take the sample metadata file into account.
- Handling of metadata files. This includes user submitted sample metadata, but also system-generated metadata such as tracking bucket versioning states and indexing VCF dimensions for faster queries. 
- Frontend to manage users, projects, and download API keys. 

## Decision

This initial system design is intended to cover all the architectural components needed to enable users to perform - at a basic level - the workflow outlined in the [Foreseen typical user journey in DivBase](#foreseen-typical-user-journey-in-divbase) section above.

### Core Technology Stack

> - **Orchestration:** [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) for production and deployed test instance. [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) for local development (with an overlay for testing). 

Author: Yes, we now have compose setup that I think we're quite happy with but at some point we'll have to make that work with Kubernetes and getting it to work locally is where I like to start :). I've only deployed things with Kustomize (and one extremely basic helm chart) and Daniel has quite limited experience with Kubernetes so for the sake of not introducing yet another new thing I will push that for using Kustomize over Helm.

> - **S3 object store:** In prod (and deployed test instance), this will be KTH NetApp. For local dev/tests, a MinIO image. 

Author: So we had a meeting with the sysadmin team recently where we were given a Tenant so we have the ability to do administrative tasks like creating buckets. 

The thing we need to get help from KTH IT support is that we want to expose the buckets to the internet (otherwise they are only accessible via the KTH VPN). While we in team squirrel have KTH accounts and can access the VPN (we had accounts with KTH because of access to Microsoft edge) so it is non-urgent, our users cannot be expected to. As we will be giving users pre-signed URLs to do file transfer to/from bucket the buckets would need to be "public". 

We talked a bit in the meeting about whether instead to just have 1 bucket (so ask IT support only once, as otherwise for every new project we'd need to contact them). I'm not so keen on this idea because I think the 1 bucket = 1 project just make things easier when it comes to managing which users can access which files etc..., of course the single bucket approach is possible to do.   

Another idea was to make say 10 buckets (e.g. scilifelab-dc-divbase-prod-{1..10}) at once and ask KTH IT to make them all public at once(so only 1 annoying email to them ), and then we can map a bucket to each project. It's not likely we will need more than 10 buckets for at least 1 year if not 2, so I'm leaning towards that approach. I will email them later today about that as I now I have created these 10 buckets.

> - **S3 object store:** In prod (and deployed test instance), this will be KTH NetApp. For local dev/tests, a MinIO image. 

Reviewer: Considering, that you can create vpn locked buckets, can't your service be a proxy in front of s3?
It would create some load on it, but I don't get an impression, that you expect that high of a load

> - **S3 object store:** In prod (and deployed test instance), this will be KTH NetApp. For local dev/tests, a MinIO image. 

Author: I've now added two more bullets to "Alternatives considered" in commit 6708f3b9ff4dd4ccf3c12e4aed0dcac5e4066cd6 . And (as you suggested in another comment) I've also added some docs on our S3 approach in our argo-cd repository.  

I'm marking this conversation as resolved, please feel free to reopen if you wish.

- **WebAPI**: [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) with Postgresql as database (db). There will be a small frontend using Jinja2 templating and HTMX if needed (see [adr/002-Basic-API-design.md](adr/002-Basic-API-design.md) for more details). 
- **Job management system:** Consisting of [Celery](https://docs.celeryq.dev) worker(s); [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com/) queue/message broker; [Redis](https://redis.io/open-source/) results backend. Interaction with job management system using [Flower API](https://flower.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). 

> - **Jobs logic:** [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) for queries on sample metadata files (e.g. subsets and filters).  [bcftools](https://samtools.github.io/bcftools/howtos/index.html) for working on VCF files.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, we picked it because of previous experience and because it is widely used. I haven't followed the Pandas vs Polars debate in a while, but great to learn that Polars might be more performant now. At the moment, we use Pandas for parsing sample metadata, and bcftools for parsing the VCF data. The latter is the computational bottleneck by far. I am not too worried about Pandas not being performant enough, but if we should ever run into performance issues with large sample metadata files, it sounds like Polars would be the way forward.

- **Metadata files:** Initial prototype will be done with flat files such as TSV and YAML. A more robust solution is possibly needed to handle I/O concurrency resulting from being a multi-user service with an asynchronous job system.
- **Testing:** [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/). For frontend e2e tests, Playwright would likely be used.
- **CLI tool (for users to interact with service)**: [Typer](https://typer.tiangolo.com/). Built as separate uv/pip installable package. 

<p align="center">
  <img src="imgs/001-initial-design.png" alt="Initial Design of DivBase" width="1200">
  <br>
  <em>Fig. 2. DivBase architecture diagram. The user can use the CLI tool to interact with DivBase API. The webAPI is responsible for authentication/authorization and communicating with the job management system. Pre-signed URLs used to enable users access to project data stored in S3. Note that Redis and bcftools are not explicitly shown in the image: the former is part of the task history monitoring, the latter is part of the Celery workers.</em>
</p>

### System boundaries

> The core functions of the DivBase is not public-facing but locked behind authentication/authorization. DivBase will require storage and compute, so the deployment on SciLifeLab hardware will - in line with scope the DDLS project - be limited to users that are affiliated with Swedish research institutions. Furthermore, DivBase is largely intended for use with unpublished data which also emphasizes the need for access control. Since auth is central to the service, it is likely a big architectural decision that will require its own ADR. 

Reviewer: Would be interesting to collaborate with @ScilifelabDataCentre/teamwhale on this. We have some of it implemented and are considering using some academic SSO system.

Author: Fair enough, would be good to learn what you end up deciding to use instead.

### Why these choices

The guiding principle in choosing the proposed tech stack was to keep the service as lightweight as possible while allowing us to demonstrate proof-of-concept for the basic functionalities of the service. We believe that the choices fulfill the technological needs discussed above that while also aligning to the DC paved-paths tech whenever possible. 

For readers that are unfamiliar with working with VCF files, the importance of bcftools it might not be evident from the list of the core tech stack, but its role as the core query engine in DivBase cannot be understaded. Bcftools is an very popular tool with a established syntax. By writing wrapper logic for running bcftools commands, the team will save a substantial amount of work compared to writing a our own custom VCF query engine. The intention is to use bcftools syntax as much as possible for DivBase to benefit from the fact that most researchers working with genetic diversity data analysis are likely to have at least encountered bcftools, if not even being proficient users. 

## Alternatives considered

- **Using Django (or flask) instead of FastAPI:** see [002-API-design.md](002-API-design.md)

> - **Kueue or SLURM instead of Celery**. Both the devs and the pilot user group have long experience of using SLURM in HPC environmentents and imagine a user experience similar to that of SLURM (queue jobs, check status, position in queue, job logs stored for later inspection). While there are no paved-paths entry for job mangement systems at DC, Celery is already used at DC for Serve. As opposed to the listed alternatives, Celery is written in Python, which is the default language at DC. Should we for some reason change to Django as per the above point, it could be beneficial that Celery has out-of-the-box support for Django. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Kueue or SLURM instead of Celery**. Both the developers and the pilot user group have extensive experience using SLURM in HPC environment and envision a user experience similar to that of SLURM (queue jobs, check status, position in queue, job logs stored for later inspection). While there are no paved-path entries for job management systems at DC, Celery is already in use at DC for SciLifeLab Serve. Unlike the listed alternatives, Celery is written in Python, which is the preferred programming language at DC. If we were to switch to Django as mentioned above, it could be beneficial that Celery has out-of-the-box support for Django. 
```

> - **RabbitMQ also as job system results backend instead of Redis**. While RabbitMQ is primiarly designed to be a job system message broker, it is able to take on the role of job systems result backend as well. Doing so would result in one less component to maintain in the tech stack. However, Redis was chosen as a results backend for its performance, ability to store persistent logs, and its excellent integration with the Flower monitoring system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **RabbitMQ also as a job system results backend instead of Redis**. While RabbitMQ is primarily designed to be a job system message broker, it is able to take on the role of job systems result backend as well. Doing so would result in one less component to maintain in the tech stack. However, Redis was chosen as a results backend for its performance, ability to store persistent logs, and its excellent integration with the Flower monitoring system.
```

> - **The proof-of-concept demo for DivBase use flat files for storing sample and system metadata**. The async, concurrent job system and the fact that multiple users might simultaneously work on the same files in the bucket might prove a challenge. Later on, we might need an ACID-compliant database such as PostgreSQL to more reliably store the metadata. However, this should be the topic of its own ADR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **The proof-of-concept demo for DivBase uses flat files to store sample and system metadata**. The asynchronous, concurrent job system, combined with the possibility of multiple users working simultaneously on the same files in the bucket, may pose challenges. Later on, we might need an ACID-compliant database such as PostgreSQL to more reliably store the metadata. However, this should be the topic of its own ADR.
```

Author: (Angela I'm taking your suggestions but removing the ACID-complaint part, Daniel and I agreed to not include that as we're not sure that really even needed). 
```suggestion
- **The proof-of-concept demo for DivBase uses flat files to store sample and system metadata**. The asynchronous, concurrent job system, combined with the possibility of multiple users working simultaneously on the same files in the bucket, may pose challenges.
```

## Consequences

Adopting the proposed tech stack for developing the inital prototype for Divbase is foreseen to have the following consequences:

### Positive

- The proposed tech stack will ensure that the core functionalities of DivBase will be implementable and will, as such, be a major step towards what will eventually be the DivBase MVP.

- The choice of bcftools ensures that all standard VCF subsets and filtering operations are supported by DivBase. This means that the team can focus on developing logic for query functionalities not supported by bcftools. The two main features are to be able to run queries horizontally across multiple VCF files, and coupling queries to a sample metadata file. This will create more powerful query "pipelines", and will be a major selling point of DivBase.

- At the time of writing, two team members have research experience working with VCF files and bcftools, and thus have a good understanding of use-cases, specifications, and quirks with the data format and its applications in different research projects.

### Risks & Challenges

> - **Team learning curve** The team members have experience with some of the components in tech stack, but most of them are new to the team. Basic implementation does not seem to be an issue, but it would be valuable if other staff at DC or SciLifeLab that could help with advice on best practices and optimization at some point during the development. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Team learning curve** The team members have experience with some of the components in tech stack, but most of them are new to the team. Basic implementation does not seem to be an issue, but it would be valuable if other staff at DC or SciLifeLab could provide advice on best practices and optimization at some point during the development. 
```

- **Creating a robust system that can handle concurrent operations**. The use of concurrent operations in a multi-user service means that files will need to be protected against data errors and corruption due to parallel I/O operations. This is not only a technical risk but also an information security risk. How will data integrity issues affect the system, the users, their collaborators, and the quality of the research project? This will need to specifically addressed during the development Jobs will likely need to keep track of file version ID from the S3 store to ensure that all operations happen on the file versions present in the bucket at the time of job start.

> - **Performance and implementation challenges on the cluster hardware is currently an unknown** We have not yet been able to test how our proposed tech stack would handle large files/big queries. We are aware of the possibility that once we get access to the production hardware and can get an idea of query performance, there is a risk that we need to reconsider some tech choices.

Reviewer: You could use locust to load test the service

Author: @brinkdp should also comment here as he has taken the lead on the celery workers implementation which I suppose would be the primary target for the load testing. I think we'd be keen to use locust for this given the existing experience within DC so a presentation on it would be appreciated. That said, I don't want to stress/rush you.

Reviewer 2: Definitively, it would be great to get an introduction to Locust. 

Perhaps it was not very clear from the text, but in addition to load testing, I was also referring to learning about bottlenecks in the cluster, such as transfer of large VCF files from S3 to worker pods, learning about the CPU and memory availability, and so on. I wouldn't say that I am too worried about this, but it is an unknown to me.

### Risks & Challenges

- **Team learning curve** The team members have experience with some of the components in tech stack, but most of them are new to the team. Basic implementation does not seem to be an issue, but it would be valuable if other staff at DC or SciLifeLab could provide advice on best practices and optimization at some point during the development. 

- **Creating a robust system that can handle concurrent operations**. The use of concurrent operations in a multi-user service means that files will need to be protected against data errors and corruption due to parallel I/O operations. This is not only a technical risk but also an information security risk. How will data integrity issues affect the system, the users, their collaborators, and the quality of the research project? This will need to specifically addressed during the development Jobs will likely need to keep track of file version ID from the S3 store to ensure that all operations happen on the file versions present in the bucket at the time of job start.

> - **Performance and implementation challenges on the cluster hardware is currently an unknown** We have not yet been able to test how our proposed tech stack would handle large files/big queries. We are aware of the possibility that once we get access to the production hardware and can get an idea of query performance, there is a risk that we need to reconsider some tech choices. Once we have a deployed instance on the dev cluster we will aim to use [Locust](https://locust.io/) for load testing, given that Team Whale have experience with using it. 

Reviewer 2: Good idea, thanks for the suggestion. Added a section on that to ADR-001 now.

- [ADR-002: API-design](002-API-design.md) 

- [ADR-003: Concurrency stragedy](003-concurrency-strategy.md)

- Metadata schema

- Query syntax

### Why these choices

The guiding principle in choosing the proposed tech stack was to keep the service as lightweight as possible while allowing us to demonstrate proof-of-concept for its basic functionalities. We believe these choices meet the technological needs discussed above while also aligning with DC paved-path technologies whenever possible. 

For readers that are unfamiliar with working with VCF files, the importance of bcftools might not be immediately apparent from the core tech stack. However, its role as the core query engine in DivBase cannot be understated. Bcftools is a very popular tool with an established syntax. By writing wrapper logic around bcftools commands, the team will save a substantial amount of work compared to developing a custom VCF query engine. The intention is to use bcftools syntax as much as possible for DivBase to benefit from the fact that most researchers working with genetic diversity data are likely to have at least encountered bcftools, if not already be proficient users. 

> ### Performance validation

Reviewer 4: ## Performance Validation ✅

**Excellent addition!** You've provided concrete benchmarks based on actual data. A few comments:

### What's Good

- ✅ Real baseline from local testing (5.5 GB mouse VCF, 66M variants)
- ✅ Specific targets and acceptable ranges
- ✅ Clear decision criteria (targets → production, acceptable → optimize, below → redesign)
- ✅ Monitoring plan (k8s metrics + Prometheus consideration)

### Suggestions

**1. Add "What Triggers Re-evaluation"**

Currently says "Below acceptable → re-evaluate architectural choices" but doesn't specify what those might be. Some ideas:
```markdown
**If below acceptable thresholds, consider:**
- Query result caching (Redis) for repeated queries
- Pre-indexed VCF files (bcftools index, CSI format)
- Dedicated worker pool for large queries
- Horizontal scaling (more Celery workers)
- Alternative: Pre-processing VCF files (compression, chunking)
```

**2. S3 Transfer Speed**

> S3 transfer: >50 MB/s minimum

**Question:** Is this per-file or aggregate?

**Recommendation:** 
- Test concurrent downloads (can Celery workers pull multiple files in parallel?)
- Consider if KTH NetApp has bandwidth limits per-connection
- May need to adjust benchmarks based on S3 performance testing

**3. Prometheus vs k8s Metrics**

You mentioned:
> "An alternative could be to use Prometheus for resource logging"

I think Prometheus is better and  you could check with team Agar I think they are running Prometheus already. 

**Bottom line:** Performance validation section is solid. Minor suggestions above are enhancements, not blockers. This is resolved. ✅
